## MN148: Chachakkasutta - The Six Sets of Six
The sutta upon which this course is based.

Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's Park. There he addressed the bhikkhus thus: "Bhikkhus." — "Venerable sir," they replied. The Blessed One said this:

"Bhikkhus, I shall teach you the Dhamma that is good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, with the right meaning and phrasing; I shall reveal a holy life that is utterly perfect and pure, that is, the six sets of six. Listen and attend closely to what I shall say." — "Yes, venerable sir," the bhikkhus replied. The Blessed One said this:

Synopsis
"The six internal bases should be understood. The six external bases should be understood. The six classes of consciousness should be understood. The six classes of contact should be understood. The six classes of feeling should be understood. The six classes of craving should be understood.

Enumeration
i "‘The six internal bases should be understood.’ So it was said. And with reference to what was this said? There are the eye-base, the ear-base, the nose-base, the tongue-base, the body-base, and the mind-base. So it was with reference to this that it was said: ‘The six internal bases should be understood.’ This is the first set of six.

ii "‘The six external bases should be understood.’ So it was said. And with reference to what was this said? There are the form-base, the sound-base, the odour-base, the flavour-base, the tangible-base, and the mind-object-base. So it was with reference to this that it was said: ‘The six external bases should be understood. ’ This is the second set of six.

iii "‘The six classes of consciousness should be understood. ’ So it was said. And with reference to what was this said? Dependent on the eye and forms, eye-consciousness arises; dependent on the ear and sounds, ear-consciousness arises; dependent on the nose and odours, nose-consciousness arises; dependent on the tongue and flavours, tongue-consciousness arises; dependent on the body and tangibles, body-consciousness arises; dependent on the mind and mind-objects, mind-consciousness arises. So it was with reference to this that it was said: ‘The six classes of consciousness should be understood.’ This is the third set of six.

iv "‘The six classes of contact should be understood.’ So it was said. And with reference to what was this said? Dependent on the eye and forms, eye-consciousness arises; the meeting of the three is contact. Dependent on the ear and sounds, ear-consciousness arises; the meeting of the three is contact. Dependent on the nose and odours, nose-consciousness arises; the meeting of the three is contact. Dependent on the tongue and flavours, tongue-consciousness arises; the meeting of the three is contact. Dependent on the body and tangibles, body-consciousness arises; the meeting of the three is contact. Dependent on the mind and mind-objects, mind-consciousness arises; the meeting of the three is contact. So it was with reference to this that it was said: ‘The six classes of contact should be understood. ’ This is the fourth set of six.

v "‘The six classes of feeling should be understood.’ So it was said. And with reference to what was this said? Dependent on the eye and forms, eye-consciousness arises; the meeting of the three is contact; with contact as condition there is feeling. Dependent on the ear and sounds, ear-consciousness arises; the meeting of the three is contact; with contact as condition there is feeling. Dependent on the nose and odours, nose-consciousness arises; the meeting of the three is contact; with contact as condition there is feeling. Dependent on the tongue and flavours, tongue-consciousness arises; the meeting of the three is contact; with contact as condition there is feeling. Dependent on the body and tangibles, body-consciousness arises; the meeting of the three is contact; with contact as condition there is feeling. Dependent on the mind and mind-objects, mind-consciousness arises; the meeting of the three is contact; with contact as condition there is feeling. So it was with reference to this that it was said: ‘The six classes of feeling should be understood. ’ This is the fifth set of six.

vi "‘The six classes of craving should be understood.’ So it was said. And with reference to what was this said? Dependent on the eye and forms, eye-consciousness arises; the meeting of the three is contact; with contact as condition there is feeling; with feeling as condition there is craving. Dependent on the ear and sounds, ear-consciousness arises … with feeling as condition there is craving. Dependent on the nose and odours, nose-consciousness arises … with feeling as condition there is craving. Dependent on the tongue and flavours, tongue-consciousness arises … with feeling as condition there is craving. Dependent on the body and tangibles, body-consciousness arises … with feeling as condition there is craving. Dependent on the mind and mind-objects, mind-consciousness arises; the meeting of the three is contact; with contact as condition there is feeling; with feeling as condition there is craving. So it was with reference to this that it was said: ‘The six classes of craving should be understood.’ This is the sixth set of six.

Demonstration of not Self
i "If anyone says, ‘The eye is self,’ that is not tenable. The rise and fall of the eye are discerned, and since its rise and fall are discerned, it would follow: ‘My self rises and falls.’ That is why it is not tenable for anyone to say, ‘The eye is self.’ Thus the eye is not self.

"If anyone says, ‘Forms are self’[n.1332] The full argument of the previous paragraph is repeated for each of the remaining five terms in each set of six. The rise and fall of the forms are discerned, and since its rise and fall are discerned, it would follow: ‘My self rises and falls.’ That is why it is not tenable for anyone to say, ‘Forms are self.’ Thus the eye is not self, forms are not self.

"If anyone says, ‘Eye-consciousness is self’ The rise and fall of the eye-consciousness is discerned, and since its rise and fall is discerned, it would follow: ‘My eye-consciousness rises and falls.’ Thus eye-consciousness is not self. That is why it is not tenable for anyone to say, ‘Eye-consciousness is self.’ Thus the eye is not self, forms are not self, eye-consciousness is not self.

"If anyone says, ‘Eye-contact is self’ The rise and fall of the eye-contact is discerned, and since its rise and fall is discerned, it would follow: ‘My eye-contact rises and falls.’ That is why it is not tenable for anyone to say, ‘Eye-contact is self.’ Thus the eye is not self, forms are not self, eye-consciousness is not self, eye-contact is not self.

"If anyone says, ‘Feeling is self’ The rise and fall of the feeling is discerned, and since its rise and fall is discerned, it would follow: ‘My feeling rises and falls.’ That is why it is not tenable for anyone to say, ‘Feeling is self.’ Thus the eye is not self, forms are not self, eye-consciousness is not self, eye-contact is not self, feeling is not self.

"If anyone says, ‘Craving is self’ The rise and fall of craving is discerned, and since its rise and fall is discerned, it would follow: ‘My craving rises and falls.’ That is why it is not tenable for anyone to say, ‘Craving is self.’ Thus the eye is not self, forms are not self, eye-consciousness is not self, eye-contact is not self, feeling is not self, craving is not self.

ii "If anyone says, ‘The ear is self,’ … If anyone says, ‘The nose is self,’ … "If anyone says, ‘The tongue is self,’ … "If anyone says, ‘The body is self,’ … "If anyone says, ‘The mind is self,’ … The rise and fall of mind is discerned, and since its rise and fall is discerned, it would follow: ‘My mind rises and falls.’ That is why it is not tenable for anyone to say, ‘Mind is self.’ Thus the mind is not self.

–20"If anyone says, ‘Mind-objects are self,’ … ‘Mind-consciousness is self,’ … ‘Mind-contact is self,’ … ‘Feeling is self,’ … … ‘Craving is self’ … That is why it is not tenable for anyone to say, ‘Craving is self.’ Thus the mind is not self, mind-objects are not self, mind-consciousness is not self, mind-contact is not self, feeling is not self, craving is not self.

The Origination of Identity
"Now, bhikkhus, this is the way leading to the origination of identity. i One regards the eye thus: ‘This is mine, this I am, this is my self.’ One regards forms thus … One regards eye-consciousness thus … One regards eye-contact thus … One regards feeling thus … One regards craving thus: ‘This is mine, this I am, this is my self.’

ii–vi "One regards the ear thus: ‘This is mine, this I am, this is my self.’ … One regards the nose thus: ‘This is mine, this I am, this is my self.’ … One regards the tongue thus: ‘This is mine, this I am, this is my self.’ … One regards the body thus: ‘This is mine, this I am, this is my self.’ … One regards the mind thus: ‘This is mine, this I am, this is my self.’ One regards mind-objects thus … One regards mind-consciousness thus … One regards mind-contact thus … One regards feeling thus … One regards craving thus: ‘This is mine, this I am, this is my self.’

The Cessation of Identity
"Now, bhikkhus, this is the way leading to the cessation of identity. (i) One regards the eye thus: ‘This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self.’ One regards forms thus … One regards eye-consciousness thus … One regards eye-contact thus … One regards feeling thus … One regards craving thus: ‘This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self.’

(ii –vi) "One regards the ear thus: ‘This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self.’ … One regards the nose thus: ‘This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self.’ … One regards the tongue thus: ‘This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self.’ … One regards the body thus: ‘This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self.’ … One regards the mind thus: ‘This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self.’ One regards mind-objects thus … One regards mind-consciousness thus … One regards mind-contact thus … One regards feeling thus … One regards craving thus: ‘This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self.’

The Underlying Tendencies
i "Bhikkhus, dependent on the eye and forms, eye-consciousness arises; the meeting of the three is contact; with contact as condition there arises a feeling felt as pleasant or painful or neither-painful-nor-pleasant. When one is touched by a pleasant feeling, if one delights in it, welcomes it, and remains holding to it, then the underlying tendency to lust lies within one. When one is touched by a painful feeling, if one sorrows, grieves and laments, weeps beating one's breast and becomes distraught, then the underlying tendency to aversion lies within one. When one is touched by a neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling, if one does not understand as it actually is the origination, the disappearance, the gratification, the danger, and the escape in regard to that feeling, then the underlying tendency to ignorance lies within one. Bhikkhus, that one shall here and now make an end of suffering without abandoning the underlying tendency to lust for pleasant feeling, without abolishing the underlying tendency to aversion towards painful feeling, without extirpating the underlying tendency to ignorance in regard to neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling, without abandoning ignorance and arousing true knowledge — this is impossible.

ii –vi "Bhikkhus, dependent on the ear and sounds, ear-consciousness arises … Dependent on the mind and mind-objects, mind-consciousness arises; the meeting of the three is contact; with contact as condition there arises a feeling felt as pleasant or painful or neither-painful-nor-pleasant … Bhikkhus, that one should here and now make an end of suffering without abandoning the underlying tendency to lust for pleasant feeling … without abandoning ignorance and arousing true knowledge — this is impossible.

The Abandonment of the Underlying Tendencies
i "Bhikkhus, dependent on the eye and forms, eye-consciousness arises; the meeting of the three is contact; with contact as condition there arises a feeling felt as pleasant or painful or neither-painful-nor-pleasant. When one is touched by a pleasant feeling, if one does not delight in it, welcome it, and remain holding to it, then the underlying tendency to lust does not lie within one. When one is touched by a painful feeling, if one does not sorrow, grieve and lament, does not weep beating one's breast and become distraught, then the underlying tendency to aversion does not lie within one. When one is touched by a neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling, if one understands as it actually is the origination, the disappearance, the gratification, the danger, and the escape in regard to that feeling, then the underlying tendency to ignorance does not lie within one. Bhikkhus, that one shall here and now make an end of suffering by abandoning the underlying tendency to lust for pleasant feeling, by abolishing the underlying tendency to aversion towards painful feeling, by extirpating the underlying tendency to ignorance in regard to neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling, by abandoning ignorance and arousing true knowledge — this is possible.

–30ii –vi "Bhikkhus, dependent on the ear and sounds, ear-consciousness arises … Dependent on the mind and mind-objects, mind-consciousness arises; the meeting of the three is contact; with contact as condition there arises a feeling felt as pleasant or painful or neither-painful-nor-pleasant … Bhikkhus, that one shall here and now make an end of suffering by abandoning the underlying tendency to lust for pleasant feeling … by abandoning ignorance and arousing true knowledge — this is possible.

Liberation
"Seeing thus, bhikkhus, a well-taught noble disciple becomes disenchanted with the eye, disenchanted with forms, disenchanted with eye-consciousness, disenchanted with eye-contact, disenchanted with feeling, disenchanted with craving.

"He becomes disenchanted with the ear … He becomes disenchanted with the nose … He becomes disenchanted with the tongue … He becomes disenchanted with the body … He becomes disenchanted with the mind, disenchanted with mind-objects, disenchanted with mind-consciousness, disenchanted with mind-contact, disenchanted with feeling, disenchanted with craving.

"Being disenchanted, he becomes dispassionate. Through dispassion his mind is liberated. When it is liberated, there comes the knowledge: ‘It is liberated.’ He understands: ‘Birth is destroyed, the holy life has been lived, what had to be done has been done, there is no more coming to any state of being.’"

That is what the Blessed One said. The bhikkhus were satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One's words. Now while this discourse was being spoken, through not clinging the minds of sixty bhikkhus were liberated from the taints.
## SN48:42 The Brahmin Uṇṇabha
On the five sense, the mind, mindfulness, liberation and Nibbāna. 

At Sāvatthī. Then the brahmin Uṇṇabha approached the Blessed One and exchanged greetings with him. When they had concluded their greetings and cordial talk, he sat down to one side and said to the Blessed One:

"Master Gotama, these five faculties have different domains, different resorts; they do not experience each others’ resort and domain. What five? The eye faculty, the ear faculty, the nose faculty, the tongue faculty, the body faculty. Now, Master Gotama, as these five faculties have different domains, different resorts, and do not experience each others’ resort and domain, what is it that they take recourse in? And what is it that experiences their resort and domain?"

"Brahmin, these five faculties have different domains, different resorts; they do not experience each others’ resort and domain. What five? The eye faculty, the ear faculty, the nose faculty, the tongue faculty, the body faculty. Now, brahmin, these five faculties having different domains, different resorts, not experiencing each others’ resort and domain—they take recourse in the mind, and the mind experiences their resort and domain."

"But, Master Gotama, what is it that the mind takes recourse in?"

"The mind, brahmin, takes recourse in mindfulness."

"But, Master Gotama, what is it that mindfulness takes recourse in?"

"Mindfulness, brahmin, takes recourse in liberation."

"But, Master Gotama, what is it that liberation takes recourse in?"

"Liberation, brahmin, takes recourse in Nibbāna."

"But, Master Gotama, what is it that Nibbāna takes recourse in?"

"You have gone beyond the range of questioning, brahmin. You weren’t able to grasp the limit to questioning. For, brahmin, the holy life is lived with Nibbāna as its ground, Nibbāna as its destination, Nibbāna as its final goal."

Then the brahmin Uṇṇabha, having delighted and rejoiced in the Blessed One's statement, rose from his seat and paid homage to the Blessed One, after which he departed keeping him on his right.

Then, not long after the brahmin Uṇṇabha had departed, the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus thus:

"Bhikkhus, suppose in a house or hall with a peaked roof, opposite a window facing east, the sun was rising. When its rays enter through the window, where would they settle?"

"On the western wall, venerable sir."

"So too, bhikkhus, the brahmin Uṇṇabha has gained faith in the Tathāgata that is settled, deeply rooted, established, firm. It cannot be removed by any ascetic or brahmin or deva or Māra or Brahma or by anyone in the world. If, bhikkhus, the brahmin Uṇṇabha were to die at this time, there is no fetter bound by which he might again come to this world."


## SN35:23 The All
What's the "all"?

At Sāvatthī. "Bhikkhus, I will teach you the all.
 Listen to that … .

"And what, bhikkhus, is the all? The eye and forms, the ear and sounds, the nose and odours, the tongue and tastes, the body and tactile objects, the mind and mental phenomena. This is called the all.

"If anyone, bhikkhus, should speak thus: ‘Having rejected this all, I shall make known another all’—that would be a mere empty boast on his part. If he were questioned he would not be able to reply and, further, he would meet with vexation. For what reason? Because, bhikkhus, that would not be within his domain."

## SN35:93 The Dyad (2)

"Bhikkhus, consciousness comes to be in dependence on a dyad. And how, bhikkhus, does consciousness come to be in dependence on a dyad? In dependence on the eye and forms there arises eye-consciousness. The eye is impermanent, changing, becoming otherwise; forms are impermanent, changing, becoming otherwise. Thus this dyad is moving and tottering, impermanent, changing, becoming otherwise.

"Eye-consciousness is impermanent, changing, becoming otherwise. The cause and condition for the arising of eye-consciousness is also impermanent, changing, becoming otherwise. When, bhikkhus, eye-consciousness has arisen in dependence on a condition that is impermanent, how could it be permanent?

"The meeting, the encounter, the concurrence of these three things is called eye-contact. Eye-contact too is impermanent, changing, becoming otherwise. The cause and condition for the arising of eye-contact is also impermanent, changing, becoming otherwise. When, bhikkhus, eye-contact has arisen in dependence on a condition that is impermanent, how could it be permanent?

"Contacted, bhikkhus, one feels, contacted one intends, contacted one perceives. Thus these things too are moving and tottering, impermanent, changing, becoming otherwise.

"In dependence on the ear and sounds there arises ear-consciousness … … In dependence on the mind and mental phenomena there arises mind-consciousness. The mind is impermanent, changing, becoming otherwise; mental phenomena are impermanent, changing, becoming otherwise. Thus this dyad is moving and tottering, impermanent, changing, becoming otherwise.

"Mind-consciousness is impermanent, changing, becoming otherwise. The cause and condition for the arising of mind-consciousness is also impermanent, changing, becoming otherwise. When, bhikkhus, mind-consciousness has arisen in dependence on a condition that is impermanent, how could it be permanent?

"The meeting, the encounter, the concurrence of these three things is called mind-contact. Mind-contact too is impermanent, changing, becoming otherwise. The cause and condition for the arising of mind-contact is also impermanent, changing, becoming otherwise. When, bhikkhus, mind-contact has arisen in dependence on a condition that is impermanent, how could it be permanent?

"Contacted, bhikkhus, one feels, contacted one intends, contacted one perceives. Thus these things too are moving and tottering, impermanent, changing, becoming otherwise.

"It is in such a way, bhikkhus, that consciousness comes to be in dependence on a dyad."


## SN35:28 Burning
Everything's on fire!

On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Gaya, at Gaya's Head, together with a thousand bhikkhus. There the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus thus:

"Bhikkhus, all is burning. And what, bhikkhus, is the all that is burning? The eye is burning, forms are burning, eye-consciousness is burning, eye-contact is burning, and whatever feeling arises with eye-contact as condition—whether pleasant or painful or neither-painful-nor-pleasant—that too is burning. Burning with what? Burning with the fire of lust, with the fire of hatred, with the fire of delusion; burning with birth, aging, and death; with sorrow, lamentation, pain, displeasure, and despair, I say.

"The ear is burning … … The mind is burning … and whatever feeling arises with mind-contact as condition—whether pleasant or painful or neither-painful-nor-pleasant—that too is burning. Burning with what? Burning with the fire of lust, with the fire of hatred, with the fire of delusion; burning with birth, aging, and death; with sorrow, lamentation, pain, displeasure, and despair, I say.

"Seeing thus, bhikkhus, the instructed noble disciple experiences revulsion towards the eye, towards forms, towards eye-consciousness, towards eye-contact, towards whatever feeling arises with eye-contact as condition—whether pleasant or painful or neither-painful-nor-pleasant; experiences revulsion towards the ear … towards the mind … towards whatever feeling arises with mind-contact as condition … . Experiencing revulsion, he becomes dispassionate. Through dispassion his mind is liberated. When it is liberated there comes the knowledge: ‘It's liberated.’ He understands: ‘Destroyed is birth, the holy life has been lived, what had to be done has been done, there is no more for this state of being.’"

This is what the Blessed One said. Elated, those bhikkhus delighted in the Blessed One's statement. And while this discourse was being spoken, the minds of the thousand bhikkhus were liberated from the taints by nonclinging.

[[5.03 Suttas on Vedanā|Next]]