## SN35:85 Empty Is the World
On emptiness.

Then the Venerable Ānanda approached the Blessed One … and said to him: "Venerable sir, it is said, ‘Empty is the world, empty is the world.’ In what way, venerable sir, is it said, ‘Empty is the world’?"

"It is, Ānanda, because it is empty of self and of what belongs to self that it is said, ‘Empty is the world.’ And what is empty of self and of what belongs to self? The eye, Ānanda, is empty of self and of what belongs to self. Forms are empty of self and of what belongs to self. Eye-consciousness is empty of self and of what belongs to self. Eye-contact is empty of self and of what belongs to self … . Whatever feeling arises with mind-contact as condition—whether pleasant or painful or neither-painful-nor-pleasant—that too is empty of self and of what belongs to self.

"It is, Ānanda, because it is empty of self and of what belongs to self that it is said, ‘Empty is the world.’"

## Sutta Nipāta 5:16 The Questions of Mogharājā
Translated from the Pali by Bhante Sujato

 “Twice I have asked the Sakyan,”
said Venerable Mogharājā,
“but you haven’t answered me, O Seer.
I have heard that the divine hermit
answers when questioned a third time.

 Regarding this world, the other world,
and the realm of Brahmā with its gods,
I’m not familiar with the view
of the renowned Gotama.

 So I have come seeking with a question
for the one of excellent vision.
How to look upon the world
so the King of Death won’t see you?”

 “Look upon the world as empty,
Mogharājā, ever mindful.
Having uprooted the view of self,
you may thus cross over death.
That’s how to look upon the world
so the King of Death won’t see you.”

The Young Man Mogharāja's Questions are Finished

## Dhammapada - Chapter 20: Maggavagga - The Path (excerpt)
Translated from the Pali by Acharya Buddharakkhita.

"All conditioned things are impermanent"—when one sees this with wisdom, one turns away from suffering. This is the path to purification.

"All conditioned things are unsatisfactory"—when one sees this with wisdom, one turns away from suffering. This is the path to purification.

"All things are not-self"—when one sees this with wisdom, one turns away from suffering. This is the path to purification.

[[1.01 About the Course|Next]]


