All experiences have a dual aspect, the experience coming from the sense itself and the mental interpretation and response. In the beginning, this is difficult to differentiate, but becomes easier with practice.

Don't underestimate how your ability to perceive minute details of experience can radically improve with practice; not just a small increase, but an exponential increase in the ability to differentiate ever more subtle phenomena and clearly analyse those.

## Pain
Let's take a very common example that occurs for most meditators while sitting: pain in the feet or legs caused by the sitting posture. It's common to say, "My leg hurts." But let's go deeper into that experience.

The information coming from the body is physical in nature—pressure, tightness, heat, tingling, numbness. It is also located in a specific area of the body, one can delimit a shape in which the sensation exists—a strip or patch or a circle. It also changes over time—pulsing, throbbing, expanding, contracting. That's the physical aspect.

The unpleasantness of that physical sensation is a mental experience. The resistance to that physical sensation is a mental experience. The desire to move is a mental experience. Whatever stories you create around the pain are mental experiences. All of those aspects of experience come through the mind channel. 

This might be difficult to see immediately, but with repeated practice, the dual aspects of pain become very clear.

## Emotion
It might be surprising to learn that there is not a single word in the vast collection of Buddha's discourses that corresponds directly to the English word 'emotion'. Sometimes the word *vedanā* is rendered as 'emotion', but it is an awful mistranslation. *Vedanā* describes an entirely different concept which we shall look at soon, but suffice to say, it's a much simpler thing than the complexity of love or anger.

If we dissect something like anger according to *saḷāyatana*, it becomes obvious that there are two aspects to it: one is the mental experience of angry churning thoughts, a story in the mind of why you are right to be angry—completely justified, in fact!—and all the barbed words you are going to say to the other person. The other aspect is the physical experience of heat, heart racing, tension and adrenaline arousal in the body.

Almost always, what we call an emotion in English is a mental experience which also has a physical counterpart. Think of someone you love, notice the pleasant feeling in the mind and the physical sensations in the chest. Once again, two different types of experience, one mental and the other physical, both happening simultaneously. 

It's like the physical and mental experiences create a feedback loop with each other. Emotions tend to create benign or vicious circles of feedback, where the mental aspect creates a physical response, and the physical aspect reinforces the mental response. Next time you have any emotional reaction, please pay attention to both sides of the equation, and distinguish clearly between them.

## Reading
The mental / physical duality applies to all five sense experiences. Take a simple example of reading these words. What is coming from the eyes is just a mass of raw visual information, there are no words, just colours, shapes, light and dark. Only when processed by the mind do these become actual words and 'make sense'.

As you are reading, pause for a moment to really look at this text. See what is coming in on the visual channel. It may help to blur your eyes slightly, or look at the text through your peripheral vision.

Now, look normally again. As you read, say these word slowly and loudly in your mind. Silently, pronounce all these words. Now say them in a French accent. Very clearly, this is a mental experience.

Take a few moments to flip back and forth between seeing words with the eyes and understanding words in the mind to make a clear differentiation between the two.

## Naming
Even the simplest act of naming an experience reveals the physical / mental dichotomy. Stop for a moment and listen to all the sounds in your environment. Pick one to analyse.

1. Do you like the sound? 

2. What is that sound? 

3. Is there something you want to do about the sound? 

4. Are you still aware of the sound?

Your answer to all four of these questions was a mental experience.

In Buddhist terms, the pleasantness or unpleasantness of the sound is called *vedanā*, recognising the sound and being able to name it is called *saññā*, your volitional response to the sound is called *saṅkhāra*, and the knowing itself is *viññāṇa*.

## Meditation on dual experiences

Let's take a practical look at the physical and mental aspects of experience. 


<audio controls style="width: 100%; max-width: 600px;">
    <source src="assets/audio/9a. Dual Experiences.mp3" type="audio/mpeg">
</audio>



<details>
<summary>Transcript</summary>


Let's examine the dual aspects of each and every experience. For starters we will go through each of the five senses systematically. And then, once you are familiar with the process, we can go back to analysing experiences that occur within open awareness. 

So, open your eyes and take a look around you. Pick some object in your visual field and take good look at it. 

Look at the colour, the shape, the light and shadows. These are all physical aspects of a visual experience.

Do you find the sight pleasant, unpleasant or neutral. This feeling tone is a mental aspect of experience. 

What are you seeing? Name it. Recognising something is a mental aspect of experience. 

What is your response to this sight. That is a mental aspect of experience. 

And the fact of knowing this sight, the awareness of seeing something is also a mental aspect of experience. 

Pick another visual object in your environment, and break the experience apart into the physical and mental aspects. 

---

Take a listen to the sounds around you. Pick some sound in your auditory field and take a good listen at it.

The volume, the frequency, the tone, the modulation of the sound vibrating in the air. These are all physical aspects of experience.

Do you find the sound pleasant, unpleasant or neutral. This feeling tone is a mental aspect of experience. 

What are you hearing? Name it. Recognising something is a mental aspect of experience. 

What is your response to this sound. That is a mental aspect of experience. 

And the fact of knowing this sound, the awareness of hearing something is also a mental aspect of experience. 

Pick another sound in your environment, and break the experience apart into the physical and mental aspects. 

---

Find something in your environment to smell and take a long slow inhalation.

The smell, the intensity of the smell are physical aspects of experience.

Do you find the smell pleasant, unpleasant or neutral. This feeling tone is a mental aspect of experience. 

What are you smelling? Name it. Recognising something is a mental aspect of experience. 

What is your response to this smell. That is a mental aspect of experience. 

And the fact of knowing this smell, the awareness of smelling something is also a mental aspect of experience. 

Pick another smell in your environment, and break the experience apart into the physical and mental aspects. 

---

When you taste something, the sweetness, saltiness, sourness and bitterness are physical aspects of experience.

Do you find the taste pleasant, unpleasant or neutral. This feeling tone is a mental aspect of experience. 

What are you tasting? Name it. Recognising something is a mental aspect of experience. 

What is your response to this taste. That too is a mental aspect of experience. 

And the fact of knowing this taste, the awareness of tasting something is also a mental aspect of experience. 

---

Feel all the physical sensations occurring in your body right now and focus on one in detail.

The physical sensation itself, it's shape, location, change in intensity, and movement. These are all physical aspects of experience.

Do you find the sensation pleasant, unpleasant or neutral. This feeling tone is a mental aspect of experience. 

What is the physical sensation you are feeling? Name it. Recognising something is a mental aspect of experience. 

What is your response to this physical sensation. That too is a mental aspect of experience. 

And the fact of knowing this physical sensation, the awareness of a bodily feeling is a also mental aspect of experience. 

Pick another physical sensation, and break the experience apart into the physical and mental aspects. 

---

Now let us return to open awareness, and keep examining the dual aspects of experiences. 

Whatever you are seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting or feeling right now is the physical aspect of experience. That is coming through the eye, ear, nose, tongue or body channel. This is *rūpa*.

Then there are are four mental aspects to this experience to notice. 

1 The pleasantness, or unpleasantness or neutral tone of the experience. This is *Vedanā*

2 The recognition of the experience, being able to name it. This is  *Saññā*

3 The responses to the experience. These are *Saṅkhārā*

4 And knowing the experience, awareness of the experience. This is  *Viññāṇa*

---

All experiences coming through the eyes, ears, nose, tongue and body have a dual aspect. 

As much as you can, for as long as you can, break apart all experiences into their physical and mental components. 

---


</details>


As you continue your meditation today, pay special attention to the dual aspect of every experience. Continue with this exercise for the rest of the day, alternating with open awareness.

## Q&A

Q: Do you have any questions or doubts at this point?



<a href="2.4. Training Awareness.html">Next</a>

