> All you touch and all you see
> Is all your life will ever be
> 
> *Pink Floyd "Breath"*

Starting from a firm foundation of mindfulness of sense experience, next we are going to examine the dependent nature of sense experience. 

There's an excellent sutta on the topic, Majjhima Nikāya 148 is called the Chachakkasuttaṃ, which means the Discourse on the Six Groups of Six.

This one paragraph in that sutta briefly outlines the remainder of this course. I translate very literally, and we then we can unpack the implications afterwards. 
 
> *cha ajjhattikāni āyatanāni veditabbāni, cha bāhirāni āyatanāni veditabbāni, cha viññāṇakāyā veditabbā, cha phassakāyā veditabbā, cha vedanākāyā veditabbā, cha taṇhākāyā veditabbā.*  
> 
> The six internal fields should be known, the six external fields should be known, the six classes of consciousness should be known, the six classes of contact should be known and the six classes of craving should be known. 
> 
> *MN148 chachakkasuttaṃ*

The sutta then goes on to define each group of six. 

> *cakkhāyatanaṃ, sotāyatanaṃ, ghānāyatanaṃ, jivhāyatanaṃ, kāyāyatanaṃ, manāyatanaṃ. cha ajjhattikāni āyatanāni veditabbānī’ti – iti yaṃ taṃ vuttaṃ, idametaṃ paṭicca vuttaṃ. idaṃ paṭhamaṃ chakkaṃ.*
> 
> The field of the eye, the field of the ear, the field of the nose, the field of the body, the field of the mind. It was with reference to this that it was said, "The six internal fields should be known". This is the first group of six. 

> *rūpāyatanaṃ, saddāyatanaṃ, gandhāyatanaṃ, rasāyatanaṃ, phoṭṭhabbāyatanaṃ, dhammāyatanaṃ. cha bāhirāni āyatanāni veditabbānī’ti – iti yaṃ taṃ vuttaṃ, idametaṃ paṭicca vuttaṃ. idaṃ dutiyaṃ chakkaṃ.*
> 
> The field of forms, the field of sounds, the field of smells, the field of tastes, the field of tangible sensations, the field of mental phenomena. It was with reference to this that it was said, "The six external fields should be known". This is the second group of six. 

> cakkhuñca paṭicca rūpe ca uppajjati cakkhuviññāṇaṃ, sotañca paṭicca sadde ca uppajjati sotaviññāṇaṃ, ghānañca paṭicca gandhe ca uppajjati ghānaviññāṇaṃ, jivhañca paṭicca rase ca uppajjati jivhāviññāṇaṃ, kāyañca paṭicca phoṭṭhabbe ca uppajjati kāyaviññāṇaṃ, manañca paṭicca dhamme ca uppajjati manoviññāṇaṃ. cha viññāṇakāyā veditabbā’ti – iti yaṃ taṃ vuttaṃ, idametaṃ paṭicca vuttaṃ. idaṃ tatiyaṃ chakkaṃ.*
> 
> Dependent on the eye and forms, eye consciousness arises. Depending on the ear and sounds, ear consciousness arises. Dependent on the nose and smells, nose consciousness arises. Dependent on the tongue and tastes, tongue consciousness arises. Dependent on the body and tangible sensations, body consciousness arises. Dependent on the mind and mental phenomena, mind consciousness arises. It was with reference to this that it was said, "The six classes of consciousness should be known". This is the third group of six. 

So what we have here, in the terse language of Pāḷi discourses. is a discussion about the dependency of every experience. Let's explore this in more detail. 

<a href="3.02 The Internal Dependency.html">Next</a>







 








 




 


 
  