One Pāḷi word sums up this entire world of conditioned experience—*saṅkhata*. It literally means 'made together', and refers to the fact that everything is constructed, fabricated, and by one step of further abstraction, conditioned.

When something is constructed, it is made of parts. When something is made of parts, it can fall apart.

When something is conditioned, it doesn't stand by itself. It exists as long as the conditions for its existence exist. When any one of the conditions collapses, the whole thing collapses. This describes not only everything material in the known universe, but also every aspect of our subjective experience.

Included in this is everything that we value, our bodies, our appearance, our health, our relationships, our happiness—these all depend on things over which we have little or no control. When one of the conditions collapses, the thing itself collapses too.

It's really no problem that everything is constructed and conditioned. The problem is that we are looking for stable gratification in these unstable things—in material possessions like gadgets, vehicles, property, in relationships, in social organisations and political institutions, in life itself. Yet all of these things are *saṅkhata*. So there's nothing permanent or stable in life, there's nothing that can provide any stable ground to be relied on.

The Buddha frequently expressed this towards the time of his death, as his disciples bemoaned the fact that he would soon be gone.

> *"nanu etaṃ, ānanda, mayā paṭikacceva akkhātaṃ – ‘sabbeheva piyehi manāpehi nānābhāvo vinābhāvo aññathābhāvo. taṃ kutettha, ānanda, labbhā, yaṃ taṃ jātaṃ bhūtaṃ saṅkhataṃ palokadhammaṃ, taṃ vata mā palujjīti netaṃ ṭhānaṃ vijjati’.*
> 
> Surely, this has been stated by me before, Ānanda: There is parting from, separation from and alteration of every single thing that is dear and pleasant. What can be done about it!? "Whatever has come into being, is conditioned, and liable to disintegrate—may that not disintegrate!" That's is not possible.
> 
> -- *DN16 mahāparinibbānasuttaṃ, ānandayācanakathā*

This fact of conditionality is one of the most fundamental insights of the Buddha. Ironically, if we accept the basic fact of existence—nothing conditioned can ever be relied upon—this fact itself becomes solid ground which turns out to be very reliable, and ever true.
## Meditation on Saṅkhata

<details>
<summary>Transcript</summary>
 
!!! record

Every single experience is constructed and conditioned.

Every single component that makes up experience is constructed and conditioned.

If every single part is *saṅkhata*, how can the whole thing be stable?

---
The eyes are *saṅkhata*, constructed, fabricated, conditioned.

Forms are *saṅkhata*, constructed, fabricated, conditioned.

Eye consciousness is *saṅkhata*, constructed, fabricated, conditioned.

Experience of seeing is *saṅkhata*, constructed, fabricated, conditioned.

Everything which results from seeing is *saṅkhata*, constructed, fabricated, conditioned.

---
The ears are *saṅkhata*, constructed, fabricated, conditioned.

Sounds are *saṅkhata*, constructed, fabricated, conditioned.

Ear consciousness is *saṅkhata*, constructed, fabricated, conditioned.

Experience of hearing is *saṅkhata*, constructed, fabricated, conditioned.

Everything which results from hearing is *saṅkhata*, constructed, fabricated, conditioned.

---
The nose is *saṅkhata*, constructed, fabricated, conditioned.

Smells are *saṅkhata*, constructed, fabricated, conditioned.

Nose consciousness is *saṅkhata*, constructed, fabricated, conditioned.

Experience of smelling is *saṅkhata*, constructed, fabricated, conditioned.

Everything which results from smelling is *saṅkhata*, constructed, fabricated, conditioned.

---
The tongue is *saṅkhata*, constructed, fabricated, conditioned.

Flavours are *saṅkhata*, constructed, fabricated, conditioned.

Tongue consciousness is *saṅkhata*, constructed, fabricated, conditioned.

Experience of tasting is *saṅkhata*, constructed, fabricated, conditioned.

Everything which results from tasting is *saṅkhata*, constructed, fabricated, conditioned.

---
The body is *saṅkhata*, constructed, fabricated, conditioned.

Tangible sensations are *saṅkhata*, constructed, fabricated, conditioned.

Body consciousness is *saṅkhata*, constructed, fabricated, conditioned.

The experience of physical sensation is *saṅkhata*, constructed, fabricated, conditioned.

Everything which results from feeling is *saṅkhata*, constructed, fabricated, conditioned.

---
The mind is *saṅkhata*, constructed, fabricated, conditioned.

Mental phenomena are *saṅkhata*, constructed, fabricated, conditioned.

Mind consciousness is *saṅkhata*, constructed, fabricated, conditioned.

Mental experience are *saṅkhata*, constructed, fabricated, conditioned.

Everything which results from mental experience is *saṅkhata*, constructed, fabricated, conditioned.

---
Come back to open awareness

This experience right now is *saṅkhata*, constructed, fabricated, conditioned.

All components of this experience are *saṅkhata*, constructed, fabricated, conditioned.

Everything which results from this experience is *saṅkhata*, constructed, fabricated, conditioned.

How can you rely on things which are so unstable?

How can you build a happy future on things which are so unreliable? 

Keep examining this constructed nature of experience, every aspect of experience, and everything which results from experience.


</details>


## Q&A

Q: Do you have any questions or doubts at this point?




<a href="5. Vedanā.html">Next</a>

