## Meditation on Adukkham-asukkha-vedanā

Let's do a practical exercise to identify *adukkham-asukkha-vedanā* within experience.




<details>
<summary>Transcript</summary>


# Adukkhamasukha-vedanā

This is an exercise to learn to recognise _adukkham-asukha-vedanā_ coming from experience of each of the six senses.

For this exercise, there is no need to get up and walk around, as neutral *vedanā* are available everywhere. They are *by far* the most common type of *vedanā* arising from experience.

What we are focusing on, _adukkham-asukha-vedanā_, is the neutral *vedanā* which occurs with any experience — the **neither-pleasant-nor-unpleasant** quality of the experience itself. It comes so fast that it seems to be packaged together with the experience. It is immediate, experienceable, requires no thought or artificial analysis.

---

## Eye

Let's pay attention to _adukkham-asukha-vedanā_ resulting from seeing.

Take a look around you and notice anything that you see that is neither pleasant nor unpleasant, something that the mere sight of gives you no strong feeling either way.

Look around. You might see a wall, the floor, the ceiling, a door, a windowpane, usual everyday objects, a shoe, a stone, a plant, some grass, a power line, a piece of plastic, a stick, etc.

Find anything that, from the sight of it, gives you no pleasant or unpleasant feeling.

---

The neutral tone of seeing is very simple, it's something that we experience thousands of times a day. It is *by far* the most common types of response to experience. But it is very subtle—even more subtle than pleasant or unpleasant *vedanā*—and we normally don't pay attention to it.

Normally we are focused on the object of seeing. Now we're specifically zooming in and focusing on the _neutral tone_ which occurs when seeing — not the sight itself.

As you recognise the neutral tone, note to yourself, _adukkham-asukha-vedanā_, or _neva_, or neither, or neutral, whatever language is natural for you.

Once you have identified the _adukkham-asukha-vedanā_ from this sight, move on. Find another sight which gives the same neutral tone when seen.

Learn to identify this neutral tone that arises from seeing a sight.

---

## Ear

Now we're going to pay attention to _adukkham-asukha-vedanā_ resulting from hearing.

Listen carefully to every sound. Notice anything that you hear that is neither pleasant nor unpleasant, something that the mere sound of gives you no particular feeling.

Listen around. You might hear crickets, footsteps, a door closing, wind, passing traffic, distant voices, birds chirping, the hum of an appliance, an overhead fan, normal everyday sounds, etc.

Find anything that, from the sound of it, gives you no pleasant or unpleasant feeling.

---

The neutral tone of hearing is very simple, it's something that we experience thousands of times a day. It is *by far* the most common types of response to experience. But it is very subtle—even more subtle than pleasant or unpleasant *vedanā*—and we normally don't pay attention to it.

Normally we are focused on the object of hearing. Now we're specifically zooming in and focusing on the _neutral tone_ which occurs when hearing.

As you recognise the neutral tone, note to yourself, _adukkham-asukha-vedanā_, or _neva_, or neither, or neutral, whatever language is natural for you.

Once you have identified the _adukkham-asukha-vedanā_ from this sound, move on. Find another sound which gives the same neutral tone when heard.

Learn to identify this neutral tone that arises from hearing a sound.

---

## Nose

Now we're going to pay attention to _adukkham-asukha-vedanā_ resulting from smelling.

Notice anything that you smell that is neither pleasant nor unpleasant, something that the mere whiff of gives you no significant feeling.

Sniff around. You might smell your own skin, the smell of your own breath, the smell of paper, the air in your room, fabrics.

Find anything that, from the smell of it, gives you no pleasant or unpleasant feeling.

---

The neutral tone of smelling is very simple, it's something that we experience thousands of times a day. It is *by far* the most common types of response to experience. But it is very subtle—even more subtle than pleasant or unpleasant *vedanā*—and we normally don't pay attention to it.

Normally we are focused on the object of smelling. Now we're specifically zooming in and focusing on the _neutral tone_ that comes from smelling — not the smell itself.

As you recognise the neutral tone, note to yourself, _adukkham-asukha-vedanā_, or _neva_, or neither, or neutral, whatever language is natural for you.

Once you have identified the _adukkham-asukha-vedanā_ from this smell, move on. Find another odour which gives the same neutral tone when smelled.

Learn to identify this neutral tone that arises from smelling a scent.

---

## Tongue

Now we're going to pay attention to _adukkham-asukha-vedanā_ resulting from taste.

Notice anything that you taste that is neither pleasant nor unpleasant, something that  gives you no significant feeling.

Find something to taste — anything that gives no strong flavour, no sense of enjoyment or disgust. The taste of your mouth right now, plain rice, plain water, any food that you find neither tasty nor unpleasant.

Find anything that, from the taste of it, gives you no pleasant or unpleasant feeling.

---

The neutral tone of tasting is very simple, it's something that we experience thousands of times a day. It is *by far* the most common types of response to experience. But it is very subtle—even more subtle than pleasant or unpleasant *vedanā*—and we normally don't pay attention to it.

Normally we are focused on the object of tasting. Now we're specifically zooming in and focusing on the _neutral tone_ which occurs when tasting — not the taste itself.

As you recognise the neutral tone, note to yourself, _adukkham-asukha-vedanā_, or _neva_, or neither, or neutral, whatever language is natural for you.

Once you have identified the _adukkham-asukha-vedanā_ from this taste, move on. Find another flavour which gives the same neutral tone when tasted.

Learn to identify this neutral tone that arises from tasting a flavour.

---

## Body

Now we're going to pay attention to _adukkham-asukha-vedanā_ resulting from physical experience.

You don’t need to go anywhere or do anything. The body is always full of **neutral sensations**.

Notice any physical sensation that you feel that is neither pleasant nor unpleasant, something that the mere contact of gives you **no significant feeling**.

It might be the feeling of your clothes resting on your skin, the contact of your foot with the floor, the air touching your arms, room temperature, the feeling of walking, standing, sitting, lying, the weight of your limbs, the position of your tongue, the breath at your nostrils.

Find anything that, from the feel of it, gives you no pleasant or unpleasant feeling.

---

The neutral tone of physical sensation is very simple, it's something that we experience thousands of times a day. It is *by far* the most common types of response to experience. But it is very subtle—even more subtle than pleasant or unpleasant *vedanā*—and we normally don't pay attention to it.

Normally we are focused on the physical sensation. Now we're specifically zooming in and focusing on the _neutral tone_ which occurs when feeling a sensation — not the sensation itself.

As you recognise the neutral tone, note to yourself, _adukkham-asukha-vedanā_, or _neva_, or neither, or neutral, whatever language is natural for you.

Once you have identified the _adukkham-asukha-vedanā_ from this physical sensation, move on. Find another sensation which gives the same neutral tone when felt.

Learn to identify this neutral tone that arises from feeling a physical sensation.

---

## Mind

Now we're going to pay attention to _adukkham-asukha-vedanā_ resulting from mental experience.

Notice anything in the mind that is neither pleasant nor unpleasant, something that the mere thought of gives you no significant feeling.

If there is no obvious neutral sensation in the mind, then gently bring one up. Think of a fact, whats the capital of your country, a task you’ve already completed, a neutral conversation, the number twenty seven, boring work, a generic object, a memory with no emotive content.

There are many mental experiences that result in _adukkham-asukha-vedanā_.

Find anything that, from the thought of it, gives you no pleasant or unpleasant feeling.

---

The neutral tone of mental experience is very simple, it's something that we experience thousands of times a day. It is *by far* the most common types of response to experience. But it is very subtle—even more subtle than pleasant or unpleasant *vedanā*—and we normally don't pay attention to it.

Normally we are focused on the mood, thought or story. Now we're specifically zooming in and focusing on the _neutral tone_ that occurs mentally — not the mood or thought itself.

As you recognise the neutral tone, note to yourself, _adukkham-asukha-vedanā_, or _neva_, or neither, or neutral, whatever language is natural for you.

Once you have identified the _adukkham-asukha-vedanā_ from this mental experience, move on. Find another thought which gives the same neutral tone when thought.

Learn to identify this neutral tone that arises from knowing a mental experience.

---

## Open Awareness

Now we're going to come back to open awareness, and pay attention to _adukkham-asukha-vedanā_ resulting from _any_ experience.

Experience whatever is happening in the six sense fields right here, right now.

Find anything that, from the experience of it, gives you no pleasant or unpleasant feeling.

---

The neutral tone of experience is very simple, it's something that we experience thousands of times a day. It is *by far* the most common types of response to experience. But it is very subtle—even more subtle than pleasant or unpleasant *vedanā*—and we normally don't pay attention to it.

Normally we are focused on the object of experience. Now we're specifically zooming in and focusing on the _neutral tone_ which occurs when experiencing — not the experience itself.

As you recognise the neutral tone, note to yourself, _adukkham-asukha-vedanā_, or _neva_, or neither, or neutral, whatever language is natural for you.

Once you have identified the _adukkham-asukha-vedanā_ from this experience, move on. Find another experience which gives the same neutral tone when experienced.

Learn to identify this neutral tone that arises from experience.

---

Spend some time noticing the neutral tone that comes from any six sense experience — the absence of attraction or aversion, the flatness, the ordinariness of something happening.

The Pāḷi for this is _adukkham-asukha-vedanā_, neutral *vedanā*.

Learn to identify this as it is happening.

</details>

## Q&A

Q: Do you have any questions or doubts at this point?

## References



<a href="5.4. Three Types of Vedanā.html">Next</a>

