
## Meditation on eighteen types of *vedanā*



<details>
<summary>Transcript</summary>


This meditation on the eighteen types of *vedanā* is an excellent exercise in open awareness and noting. 

I cannot recommend it highly enough for developing very powerful, continuous present moment awareness of the six fields of experience, along with detailed analysis and discernment of experience according to the Dhamma. In short, it combines *satisambojjhaṅga* and *dhammavicāyasambhojjaṅga* into a potent exercise. All you need to do is sustain the effort to reap the rewards of this authentic practice. 

There is nothing new here, merely a new combination of things which you are already familiar with. One, naming the channel of experience, and two, naming the type of *vedanā*.

Let's go through it step by step. 

---

When seeing, immediately label the experience as cakkhu, eye channel or eye.

If it is a pleasant experience, label it as pleasant or sukha. Eye pleasant, or cakkhu sukka, as your prefer.

If it is an unpleasant experience, label it as dukkha or unpleasant. Eye unpleasant, or cakkhu dukkha.

If it is a neutral experience, which will be by far the most common type, label it is eye neutral, or, cakkhu neva.

---

When hearing, immediately label the experience as sota, ear channel or ear.

If it is a pleasant experience, label it as pleasant or sukha. Ear pleasant, or sota sukka, as your prefer.

If it is an unpleasant experience, label it as dukkha or unpleasant. Ear unpleasant, or sota dukkha.

If it is a neutral experience, which will be by far the most common type, label it is ear neutral, or, sota neva.

---
When smelling, immediately label the experience as ghāna, nose channel or nose.

If it is a pleasant experience, label it as pleasant or sukha. Nose pleasant, or ghāna sukka, as your prefer.

If it is an unpleasant experience, label it as dukkha or unpleasant. Nose unpleasant, or ghāna dukkha.

If it is a neutral experience, which will be by far the most common type, label it is noise neutral, or, ghāna neva.

---

When tasting, immediately label the experience as jivhā, tongue channel or tongue.

If it is a pleasant experience, label it as pleasant or sukha. Tongue pleasant, or jivhā sukka, as your prefer.

If it is an unpleasant experience, label it as dukkha or unpleasant. Tongue unpleasant, or jivhā dukkha.

If it is a neutral experience, which will be by far the most common type, label it is tongue neutral, or, jivhā neva.

---
When feeling a physical sedation, immediately label the experience as kāya, body channel or body.

If it is a pleasant experience, label it as pleasant or sukha. Body pleasant, or kāya sukka, as your prefer.

If it is an unpleasant experience, label it as dukkha or unpleasant. Body unpleasant, or kāya dukkha.

If it is a neutral experience, which will be by far the most common type, label it is body neutral, or, kāya neva.

---
When cognizing any mental phenomena, immediately label the experience as mano, mind channel or mind.

If it is a pleasant experience, label it as pleasant or sukha. Mind pleasant, or mano sukka, as your prefer.

If it is an unpleasant experience, label it as dukkha or unpleasant. Mind unpleasant, or mano dukkha.

If it is a neutral experience, which will be by far the most common type, label it is mine neutral, or, mano neva.

---
With each and every experience, name the channel. 

If it is a pleasant experience, label it as pleasant or sukha. 

If it is an unpleasant experience, label it as dukkha or unpleasant. 

If it is a neutral experience, which will be by far the most common type, label it is neutral. 

Keep noting the channel, noting the vedanā.

---
These are the eighteen types of vedanā, six sense fields, each with three types of possible vedanā.

First name the channel, then name the vedanā.

What channel are you experiencing right now? 

What type of vedanā?

Note it as quick as you can and move on to the next experience which grabs your attention. 

---

Eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, mind. 

Pleasant, unpleasant, neutral. 

These are the eighteen possibilities.

Keep diligently noting each channel of experience, each type of vedanā.

---
Find a good place that you can maintain for the whole day. 

Noting the channel, noting the vedanā.

---
Persist with this practice, as long as you can. 

Then take a short break with open awareness. 

Then get back to work. 

Noting the channel, noting the vedanā.

---
Build up your mental stamina, so that you can keep going with this for long periods of time. 

Take breaks as required, then back to work. 

Noting the channel, noting the vedanā.

---
Put in the effort, and reap the rewards of this exercise. 

Apply your vīriya.

Keep noting the channel, noting the vedanā.

---

What channel are you experiencing right now? 

What type of vedanā?

Note it and move on to the next experience.

---

Keep going like this. 

Noting the channel, noting the vedanā.

---


</details>


Continue with this powerful practice throughout the day. When tired, rest for a short time in open awareness, then get back to work. Now is the time to apply maximum effort.

## Q&A

Q: Do you have any questions or doubts at this point?

## References





<a href="5.6. Craving, Aversion and Ignorance.html">Next</a>

