*cakkhu-samphassajā* *sukha-vedanā* *aniccā*  
*cakkhu-samphassajā* *dukkha-vedanā* *aniccā*  
*cakkhu-samphassajā* *adukkham-asukha-vedanā* *aniccā*  

sota-samphassajā *sukha-vedanā* *aniccā*  
sota-samphassajā *dukkha-vedanā* *aniccā*  
sota-samphassajā *adukkham-asukha-vedanā* *aniccā*  

ghāna-samphassajā *sukha-vedanā* *aniccā*  
ghāna-samphassajā *dukkha-vedanā* *aniccā*  
ghāna-samphassajā *adukkham-asukha-vedanā* *aniccā*  

jivhā-samphassajā *sukha-vedanā* *aniccā*  
jivhā-samphassajā *dukkha-vedanā* *aniccā*  
jivhā-samphassajā *adukkham-asukha-vedanā* *aniccā*  

kāya-samphassajā *sukha-vedanā* *aniccā*  
kāya-samphassajā *dukkha-vedanā* *aniccā*  
kāya-samphassajā *adukkham-asukha-vedanā* *aniccā*  

mano-samphassajā *sukha-vedanā* *aniccā*  
mano-samphassajā *dukkha-vedanā* *aniccā*  
mano-samphassajā *adukkham-asukha-vedanā* *aniccā*  

## Meditation on *anicca *vedanā**

Let's do a practical exercise to recognize the impermanence of all *vedanā*.


<audio controls style="width: 100%; max-width: 600px;">
    <source src="assets/audio/06-02-vedana-are-anicca.mp3" type="audio/mpeg">
</audio>


<details>
<summary>Transcript</summary>


This is a practical exercise in learning to recognize how all *vedanā* are impermanent. 

To do this we will 
1. name the channel of experience,
2. name the type of *vedanā*,
3. and recognise that it is *anicca*.

Let's go through it step by step to clearly identify that all *vedanā* are *anicca*.

---

When any experience occurs, 

First note the channel. Eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, or mind. 

Then note the vedanā, pleasant, unpleasant or neutral, *sukha*, *dukkha*, *adukkham-asukha* or *neva*.

Then recognise that the *vedanā* is impermanent, it arises, it changes, it disappears. *vedanā aniccā*.

---

Let's start with the sense of sight. 

Open your eyes and take a look around you. 

When seeing something, note the channel as *cakkhu*, eye channel or eye.

Then note the vedanā, pleasant or *sukha*, unpleasant or *dukkha*, neutral *adukkham-asukha* or *neva*.

Then recognise that the *vedanā* is impermanent, it arises, it changes, it disappears. *vedanā aniccā*.

Pay attention to your visual experiences in this way for a minute.

All *vedanā* that arise from seeing are *anicca*.

---
Let's move on to the sense of hearing. 

Take a listen to the sounds around you.

When hearing something, note the channel as *sota*, or ear channel, or ear. 

Then note the vedanā, pleasant or *sukha*, unpleasant or *dukkha*, neutral *adukkham-asukha* or *neva*.

Then recognise that the *vedanā* is impermanent, it arises, it changes, it disappears. *vedanā aniccā*.

Pay attention to your auditory experiences in this way for a minute.

See for yourself that *vedanā* that arise from hearing are *anicca*.


---
Let's move on to the sense of smell. 

Take a deep inhalation and smell your environment. 

When smelling something, note the channel as *ghāna*, nose channel, or nose. 

Then note the vedanā, pleasant or *sukha*, unpleasant or *dukkha*, neutral *adukkham-asukha* or *neva*.

Most importantly recognise that the *vedanā* is impermanent, it arises, it changes, it disappears. *vedanā aniccā*.

Pay attention to your smelling experiences in this way for a minute.

All *vedanā* that arise from smelling are *anicca*.

---
Let's move on to the sense of taste. 

Taste whatever is in your mouth right now.

When tasting something, note the channel as *jivhā*, or tongue channel, or tongue. 

Then note the vedanā, pleasant or *sukha*, unpleasant or *dukkha*, neutral *adukkham-asukha* or *neva*.

Then recognise that the *vedanā* is impermanent, it arises, it changes, it disappears. *vedanā aniccā*.

Pay attention to your taste experiences in this way for a minute.

All *vedanā* that arise from tasting are *anicca*.

---

Let's move on to tactile sense.

Feel your body, it is full of physical sensations.

When feeling a physical sensation, note the channel as *kāya*, body channel, or body. 

Then note the type of vedanā, pleasant or *sukha*, unpleasant or *dukkha*, neutral *adukkham-asukha* or *neva*.

Then recognise that the *vedanā* is impermanent, it arises, it changes, it disappears. *vedanā aniccā*.

Pay attention to your bodily experiences in this way for a minute.

All *vedanā* that arise from feeling physical sensations are *anicca*.

---
Finally we come to the mind.

Give full attention to your mental experiences, they are always changing.

When knowing some mental phenomena, note the channel as *mano*, mind channel, or mind. 

Then note the vedanā, pleasant or *sukha*, unpleasant or *dukkha*, neutral *adukkham-asukha* or *neva*.

Then recognise that the *vedanā* is impermanent, it arises, it changes, it disappears. *vedanā aniccā*.

Pay attention to your mental experiences in this way for a minute.

See for yourself, all *vedanā* that arise from mental experience are *anicca*.

---
Now come back to open awareness.

Pay attention to anything to whatever is happening right now. 

First note the channel. Eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, or mind. 

Then note the vedanā, pleasant or *sukha*, unpleasant or *dukkha*, neutral *adukkham-asukha* or *neva*.

Then recognise that the *vedanā* is impermanent, it arises, it changes, it disappears. *vedanā aniccā*.

Keep on paying attention to your experiences in this way. 

See for yourself, all *vedanā* are *anicca*.

---

Keep training yourself to recognise all *vedanā* as *anicca*.

First name the channel of experience

Then name the type of *vedanā*.

Then recognise that it is *anicca*, it arise, changes and disappears. 

All *vedanā* are *anicca*.



---

</details>

Continue with this meditation for the day, seeing all *vedanā* are *anicca*.

## Q&A

Q: Do you have any questions or doubts at this point?

## References


<a href="6.3. Analysis of Anicca.html">Next</a>

