*Dukkha* is another word with such a broad scope of meaning, that no single English word can encompass it. On a physical level it is aches and pains, on a mental level it is everything from stress and anxiety to full-on depression. But these aren't the real problem, as we also experience physical comfort and pleasure, and mental calm and happiness. The kind of *dukkha* that the Buddha was talking about in the Four Noble Truths is not something that gets experiences from time to time, like physical pain and mental stress, but an inherent quality of experience itself. The fact that everything is constructed and conditioned, means it can never last, cannot provide any lasting satisfaction, or be a permanent basis upon which to build one's life, cannot be relied on. This kind of *dukkha* is sometimes called existential *dukkha* or structural *dukkha*. This is what's being referred to in this quotation:

> *yadaniccaṃ taṃ dukkhaṃ.*
> 
> Whatever is impermanent is *dukkha*.
> 
> -- *SN35.1 ajjhattāniccasuttaṃ*

This simple, frequently occurring statement is one of the most profound in the entire collection of the Buddha's recorded discourses. Whatever is transient cannot provide any stable comfort or lasting satisfaction. What does this apply to? Everything! Does that stop us seeking pleasure in what, structurally, cannot provide any enduring comfort? Certainly not! It's fundamental to the human condition.

As humans we place enormous faith in things which are constructed and conditioned—things like health, family and children, career, material possessions, property, political affiliation, national identity, even life itself. Structurally, there's no possibility of getting permanent fulfilment from impermanent things. This is *dukkha*. 

As an example, no matter how much organic food we eat, no matter how many nutritional supplements we take, no matter what health practices we undertake, no matter what exercises regimen we perform, we are all still going to get old, sick and die. All 8 billion of us will be dead in a little more than a century. That's *dukkha*.

## Meditation on recognizing *dukkha*

Let's do a practical meditation exercise to learn to recognize *dukkha*, not as some abstract concept, but a tangible reality within our own experience.



<a href="6.5. Giving Up Interest in Dukkha.html">Next</a>

