
Understanding we are immersed in structural *dukkha*, how can we get out of it?

The solution the Buddha proposed is a very practical one. Stop being interested and clinging onto things which only cause *dukkha*. Drop them immediately. 

The same way that dropping a burning hot coal brings instant relief, dropping interest in *dukkha* brings instant relief. 

> *"yaṃ kho, rādha, dukkhaṃ tatra te chando pahātabbo.*
> 
> Rādha, whatever is *dukkha*, right there, the interest in it should be abandoned.
> 
> -- *SN35.77 rādhadukkhasuttaṃ*

It's possible to see things in a radical new way. Before we were enchanted by the six fields of sense experience. Later this perception clearly arises. 

> *dukkhameva uppajjamānaṃ uppajjati, dukkhaṃ nirujjhamānaṃ nirujjhatīti na kaṅkhati na vicikicchati. aparappaccayā ñāṇamevassa ettha hoti. ettāvatā kho, kaccāna, sammādiṭṭhi hoti.*
>  
> One has no doubt or uncertainty that what arises is only *dukkha* arising, what ceases is only *dukkha* ceasing. One's understanding of this is not dependent on others. To this extent, there is right view.
> 
> -- *SN22.90 channasutta*

There are some powerful benefits to maintaining this awareness discussed in Aṅguttara Nikāya:

> *"cha, bhikkhave, ānisaṃse sampassamānena alameva bhikkhunā sabbasaṅkhāresu anodhiṃ karitvā dukkhasaññaṃ upaṭṭhāpetuṃ. katame cha? ‘sabbasaṅkhāresu ca me nibbidasaññā paccupaṭṭhitā bhavissati, seyyathāpi ukkhittāsike vadhake. sabbalokā ca me mano vuṭṭhahissati, nibbāne ca santadassāvī bhavissāmi, anusayā ca me samugghātaṃ gacchissanti , kiccakārī ca bhavissāmi, satthā ca me pariciṇṇo bhavissati mettāvatāyā’ti.*
> 
> Monks, seeing six benefits, it is suitable for a monastic to establish the perception of *dukkha* in all conditioned things, without exception.
> 
> What six?
> 
> 1. The perception of disenchantment in regard to all conditioned things will be established in me, like a murderer with a raised sword.
> 2. My mind will rise above the entire world. 
> 3. I will perceive *nibbāna* as peace.
> 4. The underlying tendencies will be eradicated.
> 5. I will be doing what should be done.
> 6. I will have served the teacher with kindness. 
> 
> -- *AN6.103 ukkhittāsikasuttaṃ*

Through seeing this inherent nature of *dukkha* in every conditioned thing, we give up the interest in and desire for it, as echoed in the famous Dhammapada verse:

> *"sabbe saṅkhārā dukkhā"ti, yadā paññāya passati,*
> *atha nibbindati dukkhe, esa maggo visuddhiyā.*
> 
> Everything fabricated is *dukkha*,
> When one sees this with understanding,
> Then one gets disenchanted by suffering,
> This is the path to purification.
> 
> -- *DHP20 Dhammpada, maggavagga, verse 278*

With that, let's practice.

## Meditation on giving up interest in *dukkha*


<audio controls style="width: 100%; max-width: 600px;">
    <source src="assets/audio/07-03-giving-up-interest-in-dukkha.mp3" type="audio/mpeg">
</audio>


<details>
<summary>Transcript</summary>


Whatever is *dukkha*, give up your interest right there.

And what is *dukkha*?

The eyes are *dukkha*. Give up your interest right there.

Forms are *dukkha*. Give up your interest right there.

Eye consciousness is *dukkha*. Give up your interest right there.

The experience of seeing is *dukkha*. Give up your interest right there. 

Whatever *vedanā* arises from the experience of seeing is *dukkha*. Give up your interest right there. 

Whatever is *dukkha*, give up your interest right there.

---

The ears are *dukkha*. Give up your interest right there.

Sounds are *dukkha*. Give up your interest right there.

Ear consciousness is *dukkha*. Give up your interest right there.

The experience of hearing is *dukkha*. Give up your interest right there. 

Whatever *vedanā* arises from the experience of hearing is *dukkha*. Give up your interest right there. 

Whatever is *dukkha*, give up your interest right there.

---

The nose is *dukkha*. Give up your interest right there.

Smells are *dukkha*. Give up your interest right there.

Nose consciousness is *dukkha*. Give up your interest right there.

The experience of smelling is *dukkha*. Give up your interest right there. 

Whatever *vedanā* arises from the experience of smelling is *dukkha*. Give up your interest right there. 

Whatever is *dukkha*, give up your interest right there.

---
The tongue is *dukkha*. Give up your interest right there.

Tastes are *dukkha*. Give up your interest right there.

Tongue consciousness is *dukkha*. Give up your interest right there.

The experience of tasting is *dukkha*. Give up your interest right there. 

Whatever *vedanā* arises from the experience of tasting is *dukkha*. Give up your interest right there. 

Whatever is *dukkha*, give up your interest right there.

---
The body is *dukkha*. Give up your interest right there.

Physical sensations are *dukkha*. Give up your interest right there.

Body consciousness is *dukkha*. Give up your interest right there.

The experience of feeling physical sensation is *dukkha*. Give up your interest right there. 

Whatever *vedanā* arises from the experience of feeling physical sensation is *dukkha*. Give up your interest right there. 

Whatever is *dukkha*, give up your interest right there.

---
The mind is *dukkha*. Give up your interest right there.

Mental phenomena are *dukkha*. Give up your interest right there.

Mind consciousness is *dukkha*. Give up your interest right there.

Mental experience is *dukkha*. Give up your interest right there. 

Whatever *vedanā* arises from mental experience is *dukkha*. Give up your interest right there. 

Whatever is *dukkha*, give up your interest right there.

---
Whatever is *dukkha*, give up your interest right there.


</details>


## Q&A

Q: Do you have any questions or doubts at this point?

## References



<a href="8. Anatta.html">Next</a>

