## What is meant by meditation?
When we talk about meditation, what do we mean? What's the mind doing in meditation? Many people have the image, contrary to their own experience, of a totally tranquil mind cleared off all thoughts, blissfully experiencing some sublime reality. While that it is certainly one possible result of meditation, it doesn't come close to describing the range of activities that fall under the heading of meditation.

The English word 'meditation' is a translation of many different Pāḷi words, which are applicable in different contexts. The most common word translated as meditation is *bhāvanā*. Literally it means 'causing to be'. More figuratively, it can be rendered as 'development' or 'cultivation'. Implicit is the sense that, just like a farmer cannot make crops grow directly, but can supply all the necessary conditions for the cultivation of a field, we too cannot directly make the mind *be* a certain way, or behave like we want it to. But we can provide the necessary *conditions* for mental cultivation, maturation and development.

There are many different activities that constitute *bhāvanā*. These include restraining the mind from certain harmful activities, cultivating beneficial perceptions to see things in a new light, actively thinking and reflecting on certain themes, non-judgemental awareness of phenomena as they are, and giving the deepest attention to the characteristics of experience. These are just some of the meditation activities described in the oldest Buddhist texts.

Another word often translated as meditation is *jhāna*, which refers to very specific stages of development that are common when practising meditation. The stages of *jhāna* are a natural result of correctly practised *bhāvanā*. Imagine if different people were given directions to the same destination, they would all pass the same landmarks and features along the way, although each person would see those same landmarks through their own subjective filters. In the same way, while there are certain common landmarks in the experience of *jhāna*, each individual person can describe these states in very different ways.

The meditation we're going to be practising in this course is awareness of naturally occurring sense experiences, as well as a detailed classification and analysis of those same experiences. If this does not fit with your preconceived idea of what meditation is, then please broaden your definition of meditation.

## The right posture for meditation
If you say the word 'meditation', what posture do you think of? The first one that comes to mind is sitting, bolt upright, preferably in full lotus posture. But this is more a remnant of the Indian cultural heritage than a direct instruction from the Buddha.

Interestingly, in most contexts, sitting is just one of many postures mentioned for meditation. In the initial instructions of the *anupubbasikkhā*, the gradual training, alternating between sitting and walking is recommended.

> *idha, mahānāma, ariyasāvako divasaṃ **caṅkamena** **nisajjāya** āvaraṇīyehi dhammehi cittaṃ parisodheti, rattiyā paṭhamaṃ yāmaṃ **caṅkamena** **nisajjāya** āvaraṇīyehi dhammehi cittaṃ parisodheti … rattiyā pacchimaṃ yāmaṃ paccuṭṭhāya **caṅkamena** **nisajjāya** āvaraṇīyehi dhammehi cittaṃ parisodheti.*
> -- *MN53 sekhasuttaṃ*

> In this case, a disciple of the Noble One purifies his mind from obstructive mental states during the day, during the first watch of the night (6pm-10pm) … and after waking up, in the last watch of the night (2am-6am) by **sitting and walking**.


At the time of the Buddha, the first thing that visitors to monasteries noticed was monks walking up and down in meditation.

> *atha kho saccako nigaṇṭhaputto pañcamattehi licchavisatehi parivuto yena mahāvanaṃ kūṭāgārasālā tenupasaṅkami. tena kho pana samayena sambahulā bhikkhū abbhokāse **caṅkamanti**.*
> -- *MN35 cūḷasaccakasuttaṃ*

> Then Saccaka, the son of Nigantha parents, approached the peaked roof monastery in the Great Wood, surrounded by a group of five hundred Licchavis. At that time many monks were **walking up and down** in the open air.


The Buddha also praises five benefits of walking meditation.

> *pañcime, bhikkhave, caṅkame ānisaṃsā. katame pañca? addhānakkhamo hoti, padhānakkhamo hoti, appābādho hoti, asitaṃ pītaṃ khāyitaṃ sāyitaṃ sammā pariṇāmaṃ gacchati, caṅkamādhigato samādhi ciraṭṭhitiko hoti.*
> -- *AN5.29 caṅkamasuttaṃ*
 
> Monks, there are these five benefits to walking meditation. What five?  
> (1) One is able to endure a long journey.  
> (2) One is able to endure making an effort.  
> (3) One is seldom sick.  
> (4) What is eaten and drunk, chewed and tasted gets well digested.  
> (5) *Samādhi* achieved while walking is long lasting.  


The Satipaṭṭhāṇa Sutta specifically mentions knowing all the four postures and everything in-between.

> *bhikkhu **gacchanto** vā gacchāmī’ti pajānāti, **ṭhito** vā ṭhitomhī’ti pajānāti, **nisinno** vā nisinnomhī’ti pajānāti, **sayāno** vā sayānomhī’ti pajānāti. yathā yathā vā panassa kāyo paṇihito hoti tathā tathā naṃ pajānāti.*
> -- *MN10 mahāsatipaṭṭhānasuttaṃ, kāyānupassanā iriyāpathapabbaṃ*

> When **moving**, a monk knows, 'I am moving', when **standing**, he knows, 'I am standing', when **seated**, he knows, 'I am seated', when **lying down**, he knows, 'I am lying down'. Whatever way the body is positioned, he knows it as such.


Interestingly, the sitting posture is only specifically mentioned in a few meditation instructions in the early discourses, most commonly as a preparation for the practice of mindfulness with breathing.

> *so pacchābhattaṃ piṇḍapātappaṭikkanto **nisīdati** pallaṅkaṃ ābhujitvā ujuṃ kāyaṃ paṇidhāya parimukhaṃ satiṃ upaṭṭhapetvā.*
> -- *DN2 sāmaññaphalasuttaṃ*

> After the meal, having returned from the alms-round, **he sits down**, folding the legs into a cross-legged posture, setting the body upright, having establishing mindfulness as first priority.

 
And sitting is also specifically mentioned in the description of the fourth *jhāna*, as well as in the simile of the fourth *jhāna*.

> *seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, puriso odātena vatthena sasīsaṃ pārupetvā **nisinno** assa, nāssa kiñci sabbāvato kāyassa odātena vatthena apphuṭaṃ assa. evameva kho, bhikkhave, bhikkhu imameva kāyaṃ parisuddhena cetasā pariyodātena pharitvā **nisinno** hoti, nāssa kiñci sabbāvato kāyassa parisuddhena cetasā pariyodātena apphuṭaṃ hoti*
> -- *MN39 mahāassapurasuttaṃ*

> Monks, just as if a person was **seated**, covered from head to foot in a white cloth, there would not be any part of the entire body uncovered by the white cloth. In the same way, a monk **is seated** having suffused this very body with this a bright mind, so there would not be any part of the entire body unsuffused with a pure bright mind. 


So, while a sitting posture is essential for the deepest reaches of meditation, it's more helpful to think of meditation as a continuous activity performed in all postures throughout the day.

If you think of meditation as a sitting-only activity, your attention is certain to lapse when you stand up and move around. It is enormously beneficial to keep alert to experience in all postures, and develop continuity of awareness.

## Q&A

Q: Do you have any questions or doubts at this point?

## References
1. [[9.2. Sutta References#MN53 Sekhasutta - A Trainee|MN53 Sekhasutta - A Trainee]]
2. [[9.2. Sutta References#AN5.29 Caṅkamasuttaṃ - Walking Meditation|AN5.29 Caṅkamasuttaṃ - Walking Meditation]]
3. [[9.2. Sutta References#MN10 Mahāsatipaṭṭhāna Sutta - The Foundations of Mindfulness - Contemplation of the Body (excerpt)|MN10 Mahāsatipaṭṭhāna Sutta - The Foundations of Mindfulness - Contemplation of the Body (excerpt)]]
4. [[9.2. Sutta References#MN39 Mahāassapura Sutta - The Longer Discourse at Assapura|MN39 Mahāassapura Sutta - The Longer Discourse at Assapura]]


