You may have noticed that everything we are dealing with here is a part of the standard explanation of *paṭiccasamuppāda*, the chain of causation or dependent origination.

> *… viññāṇapaccayā nāmarūpaṃ, nāmarūpapaccayā saḷāyatanaṃ, saḷāyatanapaccayā phasso, phassapaccayā vedanā, vedanāpaccayā taṇhā …*
> -- *SN12.1 paṭiccasamuppādasuttaṃ*

> … dependent on consciousness there are mental and physical phenomena, dependent on mental and physical phenomena there are the six sense fields, dependent on the six sense fields there is *phassa*, dependent on *phassa* there is *vedanā*, depending on *vedanā*, there is craving …

So now we turn to examine the relationship between *phassa*—contact, a conditioned conscious experience—and *vedanā*. Let us return to the *chachakkasuttaṃ* for an explanation.

> *cakkhuñca paṭicca rūpe ca uppajjati cakkhuviññāṇaṃ, tiṇṇaṃ saṅgati phasso, phassapaccayā vedanā, sotañca paṭicca sadde ca uppajjati sotaviññāṇaṃ, tiṇṇaṃ saṅgati phasso, phassapaccayā vedanā, ghānañca paṭicca gandhe ca uppajjati ghānaviññāṇaṃ, tiṇṇaṃ saṅgati phasso, phassapaccayā vedanā, jivhañca paṭicca rase ca uppajjati jivhāviññāṇaṃ, tiṇṇaṃ saṅgati phasso, phassapaccayā vedanā, kāyañca paṭicca phoṭṭhabbe ca uppajjati kāyaviññāṇaṃ, tiṇṇaṃ saṅgati phasso,phassapaccayā vedanā, manañca paṭicca dhamme ca uppajjati manoviññāṇaṃ, tiṇṇaṃ saṅgati phasso, phassapaccayā vedanā. cha vedanākāyā veditabbā’ti – iti yaṃ taṃ vuttaṃ, idametaṃ paṭicca vuttaṃ. idaṃ pañcamaṃ chakka*
> -- *MN148 chachakkasuttaṃ*

> Dependent on the eye and forms, eye consciousness arises. The meeting of the three is *phassa*. Dependent on *phassa*, there is *vedanā*.
> 
> Dependent on the ear and sounds, ear consciousness arises. The meeting of the three is *phassa*. Dependent on *phassa*, there is *vedanā*.
> 
> Dependent on the nose and smells, nose consciousness arises. The meeting of the three is *phassa*. Dependent on *phassa*, there is *vedanā*.
> 
> Dependent on the tongue and tastes, tongue consciousness arises. The meeting of the three is *phassa*. Dependent on *phassa*, there is *vedanā*.
> 
> Dependent on the body and tangible sensations, body consciousness arises. The meeting of the three is *phassa*. Dependent on *phassa*, there is *vedanā*.
> 
> Dependent on the mind and mental phenomena, mind consciousness arises. The meeting of the three is *phassa*. Dependent on *phassa*, there is *vedanā*.
> 
> It was with reference to this that it was said, "The six classes of *vedanā* should be known." This is the fifth group of six.
 
You'll notice I've left *vedanā* untranslated, because so many translations can cause confusion and misunderstanding about *vedanā*.

*Vedanā* comes from the root *√vid*, which has the meaning 'to know, sense, or feel'. It has the *-anā* suffix which creates feminine abstract process nouns, the process of doing something abstract. But before giving a definitive meaning, perhaps it is useful to discuss what *vedanā* *is not*, so that we can clearly understand what it *is*.

*Vedanā* is sometimes translated as 'emotion'. It is definitely not an emotion like anger or sadness, it is much simpler than that.

*Vedanā* in Sanskrit texts can often mean 'perception'. That is completely unrelated to the Buddhist use of the word.

In modern Indic languages, *vedanā* can even mean 'pain' or even 'agony'. Again, that is not the primary meaning found in ancient Buddhist texts.

*Vedanā* is sometimes translated as 'feeling' or 'sensation', which is getting warmer, but is misleading in that *vedanā* is not a feeling or sensation in the body, it is entirely mental.

So what is *vedanā*, and how does the word get used in the context of the early discourses? Here is a useful definition: In immediate response to every single instance of *phassa*, conscious sense experience, there is a pleasant, unpleasant, or neutral feeling tone in the mind. Obviously there is no English word that covers the full range of this definition, so perhaps it is best to leave the word untranslated to minimise confusion.

## Some examples of *vedanā*
Think of the warm sun on your skin on a cold day. Notice the feeling in the mind in response to that. The pleasantness that most people experience is *sukha-vedanā*, a pleasant feeling tone in response to the bodily experience.

What is your least favourite food? Imagine tasting that now. Take a look at your mind, the unpleasantness of the experience is *dukkha-vedanā*, an unpleasant feeling tone in response to the mental experience.

But by far the most common response to experiences is *adukkham-asukha-vedanā*, a neither-pleasant-nor-unpleasant feeling tone in response to an experience. This is sometimes call neutral *vedanā*.

Notice what kind of mental feeling, pleasant, unpleasant or neither, you have associated with the following: 

The sight of a sunset 
The sight of mud
The site of food in the dustbin
The sound of techno
The sound of dogs barking 
The sound of farting
The smell of old books
The smell of fish
The smell of wet grass
The taste of pineapple
The taste of paprika
The taste of celery 
The sensation of knee pain
The sensation of goosebumps
The sensation of an ice-cold shower
The thought of your mother
The thought of the next meal
The thought of tax returns

Every person has a different response to these stimuli. No one is responding to an objective world, everyone is responding to their own subjective experience. It is no wonder that people have wildly divergent responses and opinions when presented with the identical stimulus.

These feelings in the mind in response to sense experience are so subtle that most people are only ever aware of the most extreme pleasant and unpleasant *vedanā*, but with practice it is possible to fine tune awareness to notice ever more subtle *vedanā*, and even learn to distinctly recognize the neutral ones, or more correctly, the absence of pleasantness and unpleasantness.

All meditation on *vedanā* starts with identifying the three types within experience. For example, the Mahāsatipaṭṭhānasutta in Majjhima Nikāya begins the analysis of *vedanā* with:

> *kathañca pana, bhikkhave, bhikkhu vedanāsu vedanānupassī viharati? idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sukhaṃ vā vedanaṃ vedayamāno sukhaṃ vedanaṃ vedayāmī’ti pajānāti, dukkhaṃ vā vedanaṃ vedayamāno dukkhaṃ vedanaṃ vedayāmī’ti pajānāti, adukkhamasukhaṃ vā vedanaṃ vedayamāno adukkhamasukhaṃ vedanaṃ vedayāmī’ti pajānāti*
> -- *MN10 mahāsatipaṭṭhānasuttaṃ, vedanānupassanā*

> And how does a monk remain among *vedanā*, following *vedanā*? Experiencing a comfortable *vedanā*, one knows, "I am experiencing a comfortable *vedanā*." Experiencing an uncomfortable *vedanā*, one knows, "I am experiencing an uncomfortable *vedanā*." Experiencing a neither-uncomfortable-nor-comfortable *vedanā*, one knows, "I am experiencing a neither-uncomfortable-nor-comfortable *vedanā*."

So let us spend some time tuning into the comfort or discomfort, the pleasantness or unpleasantness of every sense experience.

This is something that you may never have really paid attention to before, so in the beginning it might be difficult. But don't give up, with practice it becomes easier and easier. In time, more and more subtle *vedanā* become apparent.

With practice and repetition, *vedanā* becomes a very reliable object of meditation. SO much so that, after the body, it is the next theme of contemplation in the Satipaṭṭhāna Sutta. By itself it is a theme that is capable of taking one all the way to the final goal of liberation.

> *phasse, bhikkhave, āhāre pariññāte tisso vedanā pariññātā honti. tīsu vedanāsu pariññātāsu ariyasāvakassa natthi kiñci uttarikaraṇīyanti vadāmi.*
> -- *SN12.63 puttamaṃsūpamasuttaṃ* 

> When the fuel of *phassa* is fully understood, then the three types of *vedanā* are fully understood. When the three types of *vedanā* are fully understood, I say, for a disciple of the Noble One, there is nothing more to be done.

1. [[9.2. Sutta References#SN12.1 Paṭiccasamuppādasutta Dependent Origination|SN12.1 Paṭiccasamuppādasutta Dependent Origination]]
2. [[9.2. Sutta References#MN148 Chachakkasutta - The Six Sets of Six|MN148 Chachakkasutta - The Six Sets of Six]]
3. [[9.2. Sutta References#MN10 Mahāsatipaṭṭhāna Sutta - The Foundations of Mindfulness - Contemplation of Feeling|MN10 Mahāsatipaṭṭhāna Sutta - The Foundations of Mindfulness - Contemplation of Feeling (excerpt)]]
4. [[9.2. Sutta References#SN12.63 Puttamaṃsūpamasutta - Son's Flesh|SN12.63 Puttamaṃsūpamasutta - Son's Flesh]]
